---
layout: post
title: Tracking my Productivity from 2016-2020
published: false
---

I've been working on my productivity seriously for about 10 years. I have experienced steps forward, and oftentimes greater steps backward. I am a significantly more productive person now, than I was four years ago. I feel this intuitively, but I do have empirical support in some of the time tracking apps I use, most notably RescueTime.

Here are the numbers:

2016 - 59 - 2979h
2017 - 67 - 1550h
2018 - 75 - 2362h
2019 - 76 - 2068h
2020 - 80 - 1297h (7 months in)

There's more detail about what these numbers mean here: https://blog.rescuetime.com/breaking-down-the-rescuetime-productivity-score/

According to RescueTime, the average productivity score across the entire RescueTime user base is 67%, they point out that this average, probably represents an above average result when compared to the average member of the general population. They also point out that a score of 75 corresponds to spending all of your computer time on activities that you marked "Productive", so a score of 100 is probably not the fair target here. Since 2016, RescueTime has been collecting data for both my leisure and work time.

A brief detour to define our terms: we can boil productivity down to a measure of impactful output for a unit of time. The numbers are simply saying I am spending more of my computer time doing productive things. They leave open the possiblity that I am deluding myself and the only thing that has changed over the past 4 years is I have increased my ability to churn out meaningless fluff that only seems productive. This is certainly possible, however, I have also observed a proportional increase in the meaningful output that are the rewards of good productivity: more problems solved, more things built, more progress toward goals. These outcomes are more difficult to quantify, but I've found that many of the new techniques I've put to use improve my ability to not only work productively with whatever time I've had, as well as improve the more valuable skill of identifying the work that is most important to my goals and values.

My productivity journey has taken me from a place where I continually felt at the mercy of whim, to a place where I now feel in control of where I'm heading. From feeling powerless and exhibiting many addictive tendencies, to a marked change in my identity to the point that I no longer identify as a chronic procrastinator. This is a tremendous step, and makes me feel optimistic that anyone can put some of these techniques to use. If I can improve my habits knowing the creature of undisciplined Id that I was, I know anyone can. I've made the use of various tools to reach this point, which I've detailed below. Some of these are part of the typical cast of characters to be found within any self-help book, while others are less conventional.

Setting sharp boundaries

It has been helpful to set and follow sharp boundaries like "between the hours of 9 and 4, I will do no leisure activities". This has saved me from the constant strain of expending effort to keep on track. A boundary liberates my mind from the constant task of shepherding the attention to more productive matters. As Benjamin Franklin wrote, "Tis easier to supress the first desire than to satisfy all that follow it." The maxim is to leave as little to the wrestling match of your willpower as possible. Make a resolution and enforce it by fending off the first few attacks of your restless, instant-gratification-hungry mind, and then you'll be home free. Even better than the boundaries you set up in your own mind are the ones which you can establish in the real world. These usually require an investment of close to zero effort to set up. If you use your phone too much in bed, put it in the other room. If you have trouble employing your time on the computer properly, use distraction blocking software like Cold Turkey, Freedom, or RescueTime to remove a whole class of temptations from your life.

Granny's principle

The Granny's principle is something that I learned from psychologist Neil Fiore's work, The Now Habit. The idea is a quaint one: "You don't get your dessert until you finish your broccoli", i.e. do the unpleasant things before you get your rewards. Fiore's premise throughout the book is that the short-term gratification achieved through procrastinating is overshadowed by the guilt of unearned pleasure. This adds a feeling of guilt that is remedied by more and more of the guilty activity in a harsh cycle. If you set up the clear conditions of only engaging in leisure when your work is through, you can prevent yourself from falling into this spiral. Unearned leisure lacks the restorative quality of earned rest, so it's only purpose is to provide a moments worth of ignorance towards the few minutes of effort required to roll up your sleeves, grit your teeth, and get into your work.

Deep Work

This is the concept popularized by Cal Newport. In Deep Work, he highlights the power of turning the bright headlights of focus onto the problem at hand. I've found that a high quality of focus is a powerful catalyst that leads to explosive periods of productive output. There's something mysterious that happens in your mind that creates non-linear returns on your effort. Three units of focus is significantly more than 50% better than two units of focus.

Mindfulness

This is one of those keystone abilities from whom many of the habits of productivity gain their actual strength. By mindfulness, I mean the ability to notice what's going on in your mind, particularly in moments of emotional adversity. This means noticing the stress you may be carrying, or the negative habits of thought that trap us. It means intercepting habitual patterns of action before they are triggered, and allows us the precious breathing space to choose a better response. This ability can be improved through the kind of standard mindfulness meditation practices that you've doubtless heard about or tried. A basic mindfulness exercise is simply paying attention to one thing -the rising and falling of your stomach as you breathe is a popular subject- for a period of minutes. When your mind wanders, acknowledge the wandering, and then redirect back to your chosen subject.

Mindfulness has been perhaps the most critical of all these techniques in my journey become productive, but it is also the thing that has taken the longest for me to see the benefits from. I have been a more or less regular meditator for a decade, and although I have experienced clear benefits, they have taken years to ripen fully. It's definitely been worth the investment.

Tightening feedback loops

Games are fun to play because they involve well-defined feedback loops of goal setting, followed by an action taken by the player, followed by a response. The player does an activity and gets rewarded (with points, a new weapon, or social prestige) if they do their activity well and punished by losing a life or by forgoing a point bonus if they perform poorly. Similarly people who enjoy their work are those who have feedback loops embedded within their daily affairs that can give the same pleasurable sense of challenges overcome and mastery gained. An example of this type of loop is the feeling a writer might experience when a sentence was typed with speed and accuracy, or that the right choice of words was used. The goal in this case is writing a good sentence, the activity is the writing of the sentence, and the reward is the sense that the sentence is good or skillful. These are feedback loops that play out within seconds, creating a sense of great satisfaction over longer periods of work. Our brains are responsive to short term rewards, and approaching an activity by trying to find and augment its loops can make it feel like a game. Loops can be about almost anything it seems. Carpenters may take pleasure from the accuracy of their measurements and cuts, whereas coders can get sastifaction from reducing their code to as few lines as possible or writing efficient comments. Identify current loops in your work and tighten them up, or creating new loops is a worthwhile use of effort.

Breaking big things into smaller things

This relates to the point above. By breaking larger goals into smaller ones, you are tightening up your feedback loops. I broke large tasks which evoked a feeling of dread in me, into smaller, more manageable tasks that promised an easier sense of accomplishment. When you get a few of these completed, you build motivational momentum that contributes to an overall sense of flow, as if I was capable of making quick work of any new challenge. There is also a motivational boost to be had from the knowledge that what you are working on is a small piece of a larger project which is valuable to you in some way. Psychologists tell us that critical to motivation is feeling that what we are doing is meaningful to meeting one of the deep needs we have. We want to feel connected to others, to have control over our lives, and to become more competent in our skills. Seeing the relationship of how your current task brings you closer to one of these larger goals can provide this meaning. I write goals for myself at the yearly, monthly, weekly and daily levels, and each of tasks I have is further broken down hierarchically into bite sized pieces. This gives a sense that a free 10 minutes can be spent towards making progress on something that is deeply meaningful to us.

Harness the power of artificial deadlines.

There are some motivational tricks that I've found work well for me when not relied upon for everyday work, but when used ocassionally, furnish a nice power pack boost to my motivation levels. Setting artificial due dates for myself has been a good way to do this. This involves a simple process. I say to myself, "I want to finish this in the next hour" and I set a timer to ring when the hour is up. The timer creates a feedback loop: the goal is to finish the task before the time is up, and the reward is the sense of mastery that comes from having finished the task with economy and skill. I find it's helpful to frame this goal in terms of mastery of the thing you are working on, so it's good to set a deadline that is reasonably ambitious. The reason I haven't been able to use this as a regular tactic is that after slipping up and missing once or twice, my confidence in the process wanes a bit. I've tapped into this principle too with calendar blocks. By simply blocking out which activities I want to complete when on my calendar, I have created a series of articial deadlines which will provide a sense of motivation.

CBT

Cognifive Behavioral Therapy is a means to identifying the limiting patterns of thought that guide your behaviors. My use of it has been to identify negative thoughts, record how often they come up during the day, and note what effects they have on my mood. After going through a period of self-observation of about 2 weeks, I had enough material to create an action plan of ways I could reframe my mental tendencies to rechannel the flow of negativity to something more positive or affirming. Here's an example: I noticed that I would often think some variant of "I'm not good enough at my work". This thought would pop into my head two or three times a day. This might not seem a sufficient hindrance to be worthy of this exercise, but one of the phenomenon I began to notice was that my mood would become less buoyant after experiencing this thought pattern. Much like a chunk of rock shooting through space, even the delicate touch of this thought adjusted my trajectory and caused the rest of my day to head in a less positive direction. Add to this the effect of habits of thought that play out a dozen time a day and I began to see the heavy toll that the weeds of the garden of my mind began to have on me. CBT is about plucking these weeds and planting better things in their place. The first thing I planted was to replace "I'm not good enough at my work" with "Every day I get better and better, look at the progress my skills have made over the past year!". This replacement thought was genuinely uplifting, and this new improved pattern has made it easier maintain equanimity to bounce back from setbacks.

I selected worthy, positive replacements for each of the dominant negative thoughts that I had, and put them into use. Using mindfulness, I was able to simply notice when these thoughts occurred, and using CBT, I was able to gradually replace them. After pulling weeds for many weeks, they began to occur less frequently. When they do sprout up, they are much easier to quickly dispatch.

Accountability from others

It's hard to come up with a more potent source of motivation than the fear of the disapproval of others. I've tried to harness this fact to my advantage by aprising people of my plans and goals and then trying earnestly to live up to those ambitions. As social animals, fitting in with the pack and being considered trustworthy are important aspriations which we tap into by telling our friend, loved ones, and co-workers what we aim to achieve. I've used this principle to my advantage by asking my partner to review my work every week in a sort of "investor meeting". One thing that I've noticed is that even if she isn't explicitly intending to keep me accountable, the fact that someone who I trust will be looking at my work does fill my sails a bit as the time nears these meetings. I want to impress her and to show her that the work I've done over the past week has been worthwhile.

The nature of the journey

Even though many of these techniques helped me make large strides forward in my perceived productivity, I now know that buoyant feeling of short-term positive change is mostly fraudulent. I made many relapses, some of which felt like I was making bigger steps backward. However, every new positive habit introduced, made gradual steps in improving the strength of my mind. The changes were barely perceptable, and only with the clarity of comparing my habits now, with where I was several years ago does it become obvious that I have a different mind now. It has taken many years for the habitual wiring in my head to be debugged and re-routed, but every day now I am reinforcing the strength of this new system. I'm still on my journey, and I fall off the wagon with greater frequency than I'd like, but I'm encouraged by my progress. I am on the path to having a better mind, four years from now.

I often wonder if genuine passion towards a pursuit of something can be manufactured. That is, can one generate the intrinsic motivation to fall in love with any arbitrary topic of study, hobby, or job? Acknowledging that you can slip a spoonful of sugar into anything to make it a bit more palatable, I'm more interested in the kind of absorbing dedication to something that would only be possible if there were a deep inner drive powering it. The answers to this question that you can pick up from the self-help literature suggest that interests cannot be made, but instead must be uncovered through a period of self-reflection and trying things out. Once your interest is discovered, you may be able to coax it into a strong passion, but to start from having no interest at all seems like a venture destined for failure. But if passions do indeed come ready-made, I wonder how they got there in the first place. Furthermore, what accounts for those people who took some time to finesse a mild interest into something more substantial?
